---
title: "Numerical accuracy in Bayesian Optimization"
author: Yeung Man Tsung (Benson)
date: 2026-04-21 12:00:00 +0800
---

Bayesian optimization is a powerful technique for optimizing black-box functions that are expensive to evaluate. However, a single optimization iteration takes cubic time in the number of data points, which becomes a bottleneck for large datasets. To address this, a number of methods are proposed to approximate the Gaussian process, the surrogate model (belief of the black-box function) used in Bayesian optimization.

This project aims to evaluate how Gaussian process approximation affects the optimization performance. Using a custom arbitrary precision implementation of Bayesian optimization, we compare the optimization performance under different levels of numerical precision. We observe that the optimization performance improves with higher precision, but the effect is only significant when the optimization progresses to a certain stage. After that, we dive into the Conjugate gradient method, a method that iteratively approximates the solution to a linear system. We empirically evaluate certain properties of the method, as well as conduct ablation studies to understand its impact on Bayesian optimization.

A few key insights from the project include:
- It could be possible to approximate the Gaussian process with lower precision in the early stages of optimization, and switch to higher precision when the optimization progresses to a certain stage. This could potentially speed up the optimization without sacrificing much performance.
- The Conjugate gradient method is very sensitive to the kernel hyperparameters. Preconditioners might speed up convergence in certain cases but degrade performance in the others. However, the residual norm relates well with the error of the solve, so it can be reliably used as a stopping criterion.
- The quality of the Gaussian process fit is the main bottleneck for optimization performance. Work can be done in improving the trace and log determinant approximations, which are currently stochastic estimators with high variance.


**Resources**
- [Dissertation report](H414210.pdf)
- [Code repository](https://github.com/local-minima-lab/bayesopt)
- [Report repository](https://github.com/local-minima-lab/bayesopt-report)
- GPytorch repositories: [GPytorch](https://github.com/local-minima-lab/gpytorch) | [Linear Operator](https://github.com/local-minima-lab/linear-operator)
